[Discounts] Described Discounts API (#2783)
ibexa/documentation-developer: docs/discounts/discounts_api.md

| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\IsProductInArray` | Cart, Catalog| `is_product_in_array` | Checks if the product belongs to the group of selected products | `product_codes` |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\IsUserInCustomerGroup` | Cart, Catalog| `is_user_in_customer_group` | Check if the customer belongs to specified [customer groups](customer_groups.md) | `customer_groups` |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\IsProductInQuantityInCart` | Cart | `is_product_in_quantity_in_cart` | Checks if the required minimum quantity of a given product is present in the cart | `quantity` |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\MinimumPurchaseAmount` | Cart | `minimum_purchase_amount` | Checks if purchase amount in the cart exceeds the specified minimum | `minimum_purchase_amount` |
| `Ibexa\DiscountsCodes\Value\DiscountCondition\IsValidDiscountCode` | Cart | `is_valid_discount_code` | Checks if the correct discount code has been provided and how many times it was used by the customer | `discount_code`, `usage_count` |

When multiple conditions are specified, all of them must be met.

> You can create your own conditions by creating a class implementing the [DiscountConditionInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-Value-DiscountConditionInterface.html) interface.

Reviewer: What is important here is that one needs to provide also dedicated factories implementations - `DiscountConditionFactoryInterface` and `DiscountRuleFactoryInterface`. Otherwise, the system won't be able to recognize custom classes and therefore build domain objects properly.

Author: I wanted to give the readers something before the "extending discounts" doc is fully ready - but now I think it's better to remove this mention for now.

I will add a link from here to the extending doc once it's ready.

1. Attach it to a discount by using the `IsValidDiscountCode` condition

Set the [`usedLimit`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-DiscountsCodes-Value-Struct-DiscountCodeCreateStruct.html#method___construct) property to the number of times a single customer can use this code, or to `null` to make the usage unlimited.

The [`DiscountCodeServiceInterface::registerUsage()`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-DiscountsCodes-DiscountCodeServiceInterface.html#method_registerUsage) method is used to track the number of times a discount code has been used.

### Example API usage

The example below contains a Command creating a cart discount. The discount:

- has the highest possible priority value
- deducts 10 EUR from the base price of the product
- is permanent
- is valid in Germany and France
- applies to 2 products
- requires a `summer10` discount code to be activated. The code can be used unlimited number of times

``` php hl_lines="53-59 61-84"
[[= include_file('code_samples/discounts/src/Command/ManageDiscountsCommand.php') =]]
```

> Similarly, use the `deleteDiscount`, `deleteTranslation`, `disableDiscount`, `enableDiscount`, and `updateDiscount` methods from the [DiscountServiceInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html) to manage the discounts. You can always attach additional logic to the Discounts API by listening to the available events.

Author: I'll link here to the event reference, but it's not part of this PR

## Search

You can search for Discounts using the [`DiscountServiceInterface::findDiscounts()](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html#method_findDiscounts) method. 

> To learn more about the available search options, see Discounts' Search Criteria and Sort Clauses.

Author: I'll link here to the search reference, but it's not part of this PR

---
description: Discounts LTS Update enables reducing prices on products or product categories based on a detailed logic resolution.
month_change: true
editions:
    - lts-update
    - commerce
---

# Discounts API

## Manage discounts and discount codes

By integrating with the [Discount feature](discounts_guide.md) you can automate the process of managing discounts, streamlining the whole process and automating business rules.

For example, you can automatically create a discount when a customer places their 3rd order, encouraging them to make another purchase and increase their chances of becoming a local customer.

> You can manage discounts using [data migrations](importing_data.md#discounts), [REST API](/api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#discounts), or the PHP API by using the [Ibexa\Contracts\Discounts\DiscountServiceInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html) service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can manage discounts using [data migrations](importing_data.md#discounts), [REST API](/api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#discounts), or the PHP API by using the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Discounts\DiscountServiceInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html) service.
```

The core concepts when working with discounts through the APIs are listed below.

### Types

When using the PHP API, the discount type defines where the discount can be applied.

> Discounts are applied in two places, listed in the [DiscountType](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-Value-DiscountType.html) class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Discounts are applied in two places, listed in the [`DiscountType`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-Value-DiscountType.html) class:
```

- **Product catalog** - `catalog` discounts are activated when browsing the product catalog and do not require any action from the customer to be activated
- **Cart** - `cart` discounts can activate when entering the [cart](cart.md), if the right conditions are met. They may also require entering a discount code to be activated

Regardless of activation place, discounts always apply to products and reduce their base price.

To define when a discount activates and how the price is reduced, use rules and conditions.
They make use of the [Symfony Expression language]([[= symfony_doc=]]//components/expression_language.html).

> Use the expression values provided below when using data migrations or the REST API to pass the right values.

Reviewer 2: I don't get where and how to use those expression values, especially when looking at REST.

The "Rules" table below has `discount_percentage` but /api/rest_api/rest_api_reference/rest_api_reference.html#discounts-create-discount use 
```json
        "rule": {
            "type": "percentage",
            "amount": 10
        },
```

The "Conditions" table says for `is_in_category` that expression value is `categories` but the REST example uses 
````
        "conditions": [
            {
                "class": "Ibexa\\Discounts\\Value\\DiscountCondition\\IsInCategory",
                "parameters": [["1", "2"]]
            }
        ]
````

It seems a bit more understandable on migration side.
Identifiers (like `is_in_currency`) and expression values (like `currency_code`) can be found on https://ez-systems-developer-documentation--2783.com.readthedocs.build/en/2783/content_management/data_migration/importing_data/#discounts example.

Author: You're right, what I had in mind was:
"it might be useful to know the expression values when parsing the REST responses", because they are there.

![Zrzut ekranu 2025-06-13 o 11 24 49](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/34650327-e300-4434-8663-0d551e0463ce)

But they are not needed when using the REST API to create.

Which one would be clearer to you - drop the REST API mention or mention that they are visible in REST responses?

Reviewer 2: I continue on this while reviewing #2780 and I see that the expression values
- are not used in payloads
https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/pull/2780/files#diff-a1cd766b343982e619dde634343b245f76b8eee0fb54043d811d25111bc01d93R8-R27
- are used in responses
https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/pull/2780/files#diff-dd6551ebe700fe3eec9bb159b5ba5c5c01aa4efc3b0826d0a862ad24ccafb28cR15-R31

I don't know now how to clarify that yet.
Somehow this confusion is "REST API's fault" which can't be fixed.

Reviewer 2: @mnocon Lets be just straight.
```suggestion
Use the expression values provided below when using data migrations or when parsing REST API responses.
```

### Rules

Discount rules define how the calculate the price reduction.
The following discount rule types are available:

| Rule type | Identifier | Description | Expression value |
|---|---|---|---|
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountRule\FixedAmount` | `fixed_amount` | Deducts the specified amount, for example 10 EUR, from the base price | `discount_amount` |

> | `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountRule\Percentage` | `percentage` | Deducts the specified percentage, for example -10%, from the base price | `discount_percentage` |

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/152546e0-da35-4894-804d-c0abf559f6b7)

I'll add some `nobr` tag to have the new lines only on Rule type and Description columns
```suggestion
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountRule\FixedAmount` | <nobr>`fixed_amount`</nobr> | Deducts the specified amount, for example <nobr>10 EUR</nobr>, from the base price | <nobr>`discount_amount`</nobr> |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountRule\Percentage` | <nobr>`percentage`</nobr> | Deducts the specified percentage, for example -10%, from the base price | <nobr>`discount_percentage`</nobr> |
```
Same with the Conditions table.

Author: Thank you! I was wondering if there's anything I could do to fix this, this is great 🙇

| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\IsProductInArray` | Cart, Catalog| `is_product_in_array` | Checks if the product belongs to the group of selected products | `product_codes` |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\IsUserInCustomerGroup` | Cart, Catalog| `is_user_in_customer_group` | Check if the customer belongs to specified [customer groups](customer_groups.md) | `customer_groups` |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\IsProductInQuantityInCart` | Cart | `is_product_in_quantity_in_cart` | Checks if the required minimum quantity of a given product is present in the cart | `quantity` |
| `Ibexa\Discounts\Value\DiscountCondition\MinimumPurchaseAmount` | Cart | `minimum_purchase_amount` | Checks if purchase amount in the cart exceeds the specified minimum | `minimum_purchase_amount` |
| `Ibexa\DiscountsCodes\Value\DiscountCondition\IsValidDiscountCode` | Cart | `is_valid_discount_code` | Checks if the correct discount code has been provided and how many times it was used by the customer | `discount_code`, `usage_count` |

When multiple conditions are specified, all of them must be met.

### Priority

> You can set discount priority as a number between 1 and 10 to indicate which discount should have [higher priority](discounts_guide.md#discounts-priority) when choosing the one to apply.

Reviewer 2: It took me some time to find out where this limit is set…:
https://github.com/ibexa/discounts/blob/main/src/bundle/Resources/config/validation.yaml#L18-L20

### Start and end date

Discounts can be permanent, or valid only in a specified time frame.

Every discount has a start date, which defaults to the date when the discount was created.
The end date can be set to `null` to make the discount permanent.

### Status

You can disable a discount anytime to stop it from being active, even if the conditions enforced by start and end date are met.

Only disabled discounts can be deleted.

### Discount translations

The discount has four properties that can be translated:

| Property | Usage |
|---|---|
| Name | Internal information for store managers |
| Description | Internal information for store managers |
| Promotion label | Information displayed to customers |
| Promotion description | Information displayed to customers |

> Use the [DiscountTranslationStruct](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-Value-Struct-DiscountTranslationStruct.html) to provide translations for discounts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the [`DiscountTranslationStruct`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-Value-Struct-DiscountTranslationStruct.html) to provide translations for discounts.
```

### Discount codes

To activate a cart discount only after a proper discount code is provided, you need to:

> 1. Create a discount code using the [DiscountCodeServiceInterface::createDiscountCode()](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-DiscountsCodes-DiscountCodeServiceInterface.html#method_createDiscountCode) method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a discount code using the [`DiscountCodeServiceInterface::createDiscountCode()`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-DiscountsCodes-DiscountCodeServiceInterface.html#method_createDiscountCode) method
```

1. Attach it to a discount by using the `IsValidDiscountCode` condition

Set the [`usedLimit`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-DiscountsCodes-Value-Struct-DiscountCodeCreateStruct.html#method___construct) property to the number of times a single customer can use this code, or to `null` to make the usage unlimited.

The [`DiscountCodeServiceInterface::registerUsage()`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-DiscountsCodes-DiscountCodeServiceInterface.html#method_registerUsage) method is used to track the number of times a discount code has been used.

### Example API usage

The example below contains a Command creating a cart discount. The discount:

> - has the highest possible priority value

Reviewer 2: As someone might prefer start with an example and I skip or skim read the begining, as someone could end here because of search terms, or whatever the reason to not fully known the concept presented above, I would link back to previous section as much as possible.

```suggestion
- has the highest possible [priority](#priority) value
```

> - deducts 10 EUR from the base price of the product

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [rule](#rules) a deduction of 10 EUR from the base price of the product
```

Author: I've changed that to
```suggestion
- [rule](#rules) deducts 10 EUR from the base price of the product
```
It fits better in my head, but you're right that linking to `rule` section is good

> - is permanent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- is [permanent](#start-and-end-date)
```

> - is valid in Germany and France
> - applies to 2 products
> - requires a `summer10` discount code to be activated. The code can be used unlimited number of times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [depends](#conditions) on
    - being bought from Germany or France
    - 2 products
    - a `summer10` [discount code](#discount-codes) which can be used unlimited number of times
```

``` php hl_lines="60-66 68-92"
[[= include_file('code_samples/discounts/src/Command/ManageDiscountsCommand.php') =]]
```

Similarly, use the `deleteDiscount`, `deleteTranslation`, `disableDiscount`, `enableDiscount`, and `updateDiscount` methods from the [DiscountServiceInterface](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html) to manage the discounts. You can always attach additional logic to the Discounts API by listening to the [available events](discounts_events.md).

## Search

> You can search for Discounts using the [`DiscountServiceInterface::findDiscounts()](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html#method_findDiscounts) method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can search for Discounts using the [`DiscountServiceInterface::findDiscounts()`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Discounts-DiscountServiceInterface.html#method_findDiscounts) method.
```
